Sustainability Marketing:
Using one little fiber to help change the fashion industry
Background:
The LYCRA Company exists to keep revolutionizing the world of textiles and apparel by extending the life of fibers. They do this by doing three things 1) product innovation; creating more resilient fibers that can use fewer resources, extending garment wear life and ultimately ensure they can be recycled or composted at the end of life 2) education; sharing their thought-leadership in circularity across the industry to help others join the fight 3) sustainability; reducing the amount of garments that are being sent to landfill while using fewer finite resources. We know this because we did the research, strategy and purpose articulation.


The LYCRA Company has always been an innovation-first organization, in some cases enabling the creation of entirely new garment categories, in others, improving on existing ones. With this innovation mindset, they set out to address the textile waste issue at its source – the fiber. In fact, their first innovation turns textile waste into new fibers. Thus reducing the amount of waste going to landfill and creating a starting point for circularity. But we also knew that they couldn’t do it alone. It would take more than a village. It would take the entire global industry.



Approach:
The LYCRA Company knows a thing or two about creating loops. And not just how loops create their resilient, high-performance fibers, but also about loops needed for innovation and collaboration. We leveraged the Company’s expertise with loops to help close another big loop – circularity – through education, innovation and collaboration across the entire apparel industry.


Idea:
The “Keep in the Loop with LYCRA” campaign wasn’t just a podium to celebrate The LYCRA Company’s sustainability achievements. It was an invitation for the entire apparel industry to come together and collaborate, educate, and innovate on behalf of people and the planet.

Additional campaign adS


What We Did:
Launch campaign was supported by a new website, trade media, PR and marketing communications to invite collaborations and partnerships across the board for brands and retailers
Interested parties could register through the website or by contacting The LYCRA Company directly
We created a  series of global thought-leadership panels  over the course of nine months across relevant sectors to solicit knowledge and point of views from the world’s leading experts, entrepreneurs and innovators and then published the findings in the trade press and shared these insights at trade fairs and events around the world.
The LYCRA Company’s first Loop was launched with new COOLMAX® and THERMOLITE® products made from 100% textile waste, swiftly followed by a first-of-its-kind, THERMOLITE® Insulation made from 100% textile waste.
The LYCRA Company announced the launch of a collaboration with Qore® LLC to create renewable LYCRA® fiber made from QIRA®.
The LYCRA Company participated in the UN’s Fashion Conscious & Lifestyle network summit to promote Sustainable fashion.
This campaign is still live and scaling.
Results are impressive, but confidential.