Article Link: https://grounded.world/thinking/sustainability-buzzwords/
Sustainability Buzzwords
by Pia Baker | Mar 1, 2023

green buzzwords
How to Use (or Avoid) Sustainability Buzzwords
Is your new bottle made of 100% recycled plastic?  Has your travel company announced a commitment to be carbon neutral?  Are you reading about other brands’ progress, and wondering about all of these sustainability buzzwords?   If you’re in marketing, you know it’s important to choose your words carefully.  To be successful at telling your brand’s story, you need to make sure your audience understands it, cares about it, believes it and is motivated by it.  AND, especially important for sustainability marketing, you need to make sure the words you choose are accurate and not misleading.  Consider all of this on top of limited packaging space or a :06 ad spot—and sustainability communications can be complicated.

Today’s Sustainability Jargon
Eco friendly buzzwords are everywhere today.  Using them in the right place at the right time can be an effective way to gain consumer trust, but it can also backfire if they are used incorrectly.   All marketers should get familiar with the FTC Green Guides (which is getting updated in 2023—so stay alert.) Beyond that, what are some of the most common sustainability buzzwords, what do they mean, and what are some watchouts?

Sustainability Terms and Their Definitions
Sustainable: This is a broad term that is rooted in the idea that you can provide goods and services today while also focusing on preserving resources for the future.  It can refer to environmental or social impact (think about the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals!)  However, out of context, the average person might define this as being “long-lasting” versus “good for the planet”—so be careful about how you use it.  And above all, if you do use this term—make sure you provide plenty of backup data and information to support this claim.
Circular:  The circular economy is an antidote to the traditional “take-make-waste” linear economy, and instead provides a framework to eliminate waste, circulate products and materials and regenerate nature.  Circular products are those that operate within the circular economy model i.e.those products that are made without virgin resources and are designed with the end of their life in mind.
Zero Waste: Zero Waste is a set of principles focused on waste prevention—meaning sending zero waste to the landfills, incinerators or the natural environment. It focuses on the many stages of waste prevention—starting with reducing use, as well as re-using, repairing, re-purposing and recycling.
Carbon Neutral means a product or company is removing the same amount of carbon dioxide it’s emitting into the atmosphere. If your brand or company is considering this claim, be prepared to have significant documentation to support it.  More, and more, certification agencies and stakeholders expect companies to reduce emissions as much as possible (through innovation, alternative energy sources, etc) before purchasing carbon offsets or credits.
Commonly Confused Sustainability Buzzwords
Recyclable/Recycled: People often confuse these terms!
Recyclable means that an item can be returned, processed, and transformed into a new raw material instead of entering the waste stream. The FTC Green Guides states that recycling must be available to at least 60% of consumers where the product is sold in order to be considered recyclable. Unfortunately, lots of packaging is not recyclable because of mixed materials, colorant, poor design, etc.
Recycled means that a used item has been returned, processed, and transformed into a new raw material, instead of entering the waste stream. Packaging made from recycled content gives new life to old materials. Notably, something can be recyclable but not made from recycled content. AND something can be made from recycled content, but not recyclable. Ideally packaging is both recyclable and made from recycled content—but make sure you have your facts straight!
Compostable/ Biodegradable:  These two terms often sound like the holy grail to consumers, but both require specific conditions—and likely will not happen if an item ends up accidentally in the landfill.
Compostable means something can break down into natural elements in a set timeframe. According to the US Composting Council, a compostable product is “any product specifically manufactured to break down in a compost system at the end of its useful life.” But it is often unclear to consumers what kind of composting is required (home vs industrial), and how long it will take for an item to break down (some products still might take  hundreds of years!)  Adding “Compostable” to a label without any other direction is misleading.
Biodegradable also means that an item will break down into natural elements. But, there might not be a set timeframe required.  Anything that is compostable is biodegradable. However, something that is biodegradable might not be compostable.
Do consumers really understand these environmental buzzwords?
A good rule of thumb for all marketers is that the average consumer spends a lot less time thinking about your brand than you do.  They will glance, scan, and move on.  And we know that many people hear ESG jargon without ever researching what it means.  So, terms are conflated, specifics are generalized.  Make sure you really put your “consumer hat” on when you’re writing, consider some quick testing for comprehension, and don’t assume everyone will get it!

Shelton Group recently published The Buzz on Buzzwords, an update to research conducted seven years earlier, which dives into what Americans think when brands use sustainability buzzwords.  Generally, they found that Americans claim to understand many key sustainability terms LESS than they did seven years ago; however, when probed, they actually know more about the terms than previously reported.   This conflict is likely due to increased skepticism—while Americans might know more about recyclability or carbon footprints, they aren’t seeing the change they’ve been promised.

Here’s what they heard when they asked Americans about the some of the same sustainability terms mentioned in this post:

Term	Do they understand It?	Do they find it meaningful?
Recyclable	71%	65%
Recycled/ Recycled Content	61%	57%
Compostable	58%	56%
Biodegradable	57%	57%
Low Carbon Footprint	48%	48%


Do consumers care about sustainability buzzwords, and are they motivated to take action?
Yes.  Consumers do care about sustainability and are increasingly rewarding brands that take action and tell their story.  NYU Stern and IRI created the Sustainable Market Share Index, which reviews consumer purchasing across 36 CPG categories and in 2022 demonstrated that products marketed as “sustainable” grew 2.7x faster than conventionally marketed products.



This is good news for brands that are taking initiative to positively impact the planet and society.  But there is plenty of opportunity for all brands to make communications more impactful.  Remember:

Know your audience!  What do they understand, what do they care about?  Speaking to an industry audience is very different from the general population.
Know your context.  How deep you go in your story depends on when and where you are presenting it.  Is it in a grocery aisle, on packaging?  You might only have a few seconds to grab a shopper’s attention—so keep it short & visual.  You can and should go deeper on your website—if a consumer has landed there, they are looking for more.
Tell a story and make it emotive.  Don’t just tell your consumers what you’re doing—make sure they know why you’re doing it too.
Most importantly, be truthful.  Be careful not to simplify or romance your real story to the point that you actually mislead the consumer.  Know the FTC Green Guides and follow them.


Final thoughts on Sustainability Buzzwords
The future is bright for purpose-led brands that have identified the sweet spot between knowing what their brand uniquely offers, what consumers really want, and what the world needs.  But remember, to capture value, brands need to share this story with the world.  And that means understanding and knowing wpurpose led brandshen to use (or not use) those sustainability buzzwords.  So, when you’re on this journey, tell your story, make it good, and choose your words wisely.